
- Copy table to notes
- We generalize the methods for large scale problems:
  - Newton's method $\rightarrow$ inexact Newton's method
  - BFGS - L-BFGS

## Inexact Newton's Method

- Recall Newton's method:
  $$
  p_k = - \left[ \nabla^2 f(x_k) \right]^{-1} \nabla f(x_k)
  $$

- Recall we can solve $p_n$ as the linear system of $Ax = b$:
  $$
  \nabla^2 f(x_n) p_n = - \nabla f(x_n) \tag{1}
  $$

- The key idea of inexact Newton methods are:
  - We aren't solving (1) directly for each iteration, rather we approximately solve (1) only up to some tolerance.
  - In particular, we will use (preconditioned) CG to approximately solve (1). This requires only Hessian matrix-vector products.
  - CG: conjugate gradient
# Convergence of Inexact Newton

Most **rules** for termination of inexact Newton methods are based on the residual error:

$$
r_k = \nabla f(x_k)(p_k + \nabla f(x_k)), \quad \text{"Ax=b"}
$$

- $p_k$: inexact Newton step
  - $p_k$: inexact
  - $\nabla f(x_k)$: exact

- In particular, we usually terminate the CG iterations for the subproblem when:

$$
\|r_k\|_2 \leq \eta_k \|\nabla f(x_k)\|_2
$$

- for some sequence $\{\eta_k\}$ with $\eta_k \in (0,1)$

- This is called the forcing sequence

**Theorem 1**: 
*Suppose*:
- $\nabla^2 f(x)$ exists and is continuous in a neighborhood of a minimizer $x^*$ at which $\nabla^2 f(x^*)$ is positive definite
- $x_0$ is sufficiently close to $x^*$ and
- $p_k$ satisfies $\|r_k\|_2 \leq \eta_k \|\nabla f(x_k)\|_2$ where $\eta_k \leq \eta$ for some constant $\eta \in (0,1)$

- Then the sequence generated by $x_{k+1} = x_k + p_k$ converges to $x^*$ and satisfies:

$$
\|\nabla^2 f(x^*)(x_{k+1} - x^*)\|_2 \leq \hat{\eta} \|\nabla f(x^*)(x_k - x^*)\|_2
$$

for some constant $\hat{\eta}$ with $\eta < \hat{\eta} < 1$
# Local convergence rate of exact Newton

**Theorem 2:**
- Suppose the conditions from theorem 1 hold and assume the exact Newton iterates $\{x_n\}$ converge to $x^*$ then:
  - If $\eta_k \to 0$ the rate of convergence is superlinear.
  - If in addition $\nabla^2 f(x)$ is Lipschitz continuous near $x^*$ and $\eta_k = O(\|\nabla f(x_n)\|_2)$ then the convergence rate is quadratic.

## Newton - CG

- Newton CG Algorithm (or the truncated Newton) as an exact Newton method where we use CG to attempt to solve:
$$\nabla^2 f(x_n)p_n = -\nabla f(x_n)$$
- Copy slide 11 algorithm.
- Copy slide 12.

## Limited Memory BFGS

Recall the BFGS update for the inverse Hessian $H_{k+1}$:
$$H_{k+1} = V_k^T H_k V_k + \rho_k s_k s_k^T$$
where
$$s_k = x_{k+1} - x_k, \quad y_k = \nabla f(x_{k+1}) - \nabla f(x_k) \quad \text{and} \quad V_k = I - \rho_k y_k s_k^T$$
with
$$\rho_k = \frac{1}{y_k^T s_k}$$
- In general $H_k$ is dense and requires $O(n^2)$ storage.

- Though we can store a modified version of the $H_k$ implicitly based on a certain number of (say $m$) most recent $(s_j, y_j)$ vector pairs.

- This method is known as the L-BFGS (Limited-memory BFGS).

- Copy slide 15 and slide 16 algo.

**Class:**

**Slide 1: Local Convergence**

In practice we may want to choose
$$
\eta_k = \min \left(0.5, \sqrt{\| \nabla f(x_k) \|} \right)
$$

- Orthod is Newton's method, inner loop is the CG algorithm for determining the

**Slide 11 algo:**

- $z_j$: CG iterates

- $d_j$: CG search directions

**Slide 12**

- Better algo excludes the approximation of true Hessian because we will use the algo.

- Hessian times vector:
$$\nabla^2 f(x_k)d \approx \frac{\nabla f(x_k - hd) - \nabla f(x_k)}{h}$$

- So these would be for algo lines 3, 10, anywhere where we multiply the Hessian by a vector.

- Which means we can avoid computing the Hessian and we can do everything with the 1st derivative.

- Slide 15

- Vectorization: Avoid computation of $-\nabla f(x_k)$, we will call $-\nabla f(x_k)$ q in the algorithm.

- Slide 17: Initialization of $q_{k+1} = ?$

- Though at M=0 so no memory we would want $|h| > 1$
